---
title: "[Accepted with Modifications] SE-0225"
link: https://forums.swift.org/t/accepted-with-modifications-se-0225-adding-iseven-isodd-ismultiple-to-binaryinteger/15689
date: 2018-08-30 17:59:01-0700
---

This announcement comes with some answers to "what should be in the Swift
standard library?"

Notably:

> Almost all library features can be composed from existing features with enough
> effort. To be considered for addition to the library, a proposed feature must
> satisfy two conditions: it must provide functionality that is useful to
> a substantial population of Swift programmers, and it must provide substantial
> advantages over the alternative ways of accomplishing that functionality.
> Potential advantages include:
>
> It may be complex, challenging, or error-prone for users to implement
> themselves.  It may have substantial performance advantages over a user
> implementation, either because it has access to library internals or just
> because the library implementation will likely be more carefully tuned.  It may
> be substantially easier to work with because it composes better with other
> language or library features.  It may be substantially more "fluent": that is,
> more natural to discover, use, and read in code. The implementation may involve
> composing primitives in a subtle or tricky way, or the primitives may be
> unfamiliar to many programmers. This is a more subjective criterion than the
> others, and people may reasonably differ about how to apply it.  For example,
> consider adding an method to rotate the elements of an array. This operation can
> be performed using a relatively simple composition of slicing and concatenation:
>
> ```
> array = array[amount...] + array[..<amount]
> ```
>
> However, a method to rotate an array in-place would still be welcome: it would
> have substantial performance advantages, it would avoid several potential
> off-by-one errors, and it would be significantly easier for a reader to
> recognize as a rotation.
>
> In contrast, a property like `isNotEmpty` offers no substantial advantages over
> `!isEmpty`, and adding it would open the door to adding trivial negations of
> essentially every predicate.
